source
======

https://archive.today/Ler4O


method
======

# Unix Bourne shell script:

wget https://archive.today/Ler4O -O irclog

sed -n "s/.*&#62;\\t\\(.*\\)/\1/p" < irclog > irclog-filtered

for re in zoe anita 'wom[ae]n' 'feminis[tm]' 'josh|boggs' kotaku nathan
do
    printf "$re: "
    grep -Eic "$re" irclog-filtered
done

# end script


explanation of method
=====================

We fetch the IRC log that's in some HTML page.

All lines that are a user talking look like "DATE <NICK> MESSAGE"
where there is a tab between <NICK> and MESSAGE.  The < and >
surrounding NICK are encoded as &#60; and &#62; in the HTML.

We go through the file with sed, finding lines matching the regexp
'.*&#62;\t' (any text, followed by the sequence "&#62;", and a tab
character), remove exactly that portion of the line, printing out the
rest.  Thus we get a file consisting purely of the users' messages in
the channel.

We run a series of case-insensitive regexps on the file, printing out
the number of matching lines (not the number of matches) for each
regexp.


result
======

zoe:         4322

wom[ae]n:    1315
anita:       1213
feminis[tm]:  990

kotaku:       757
josh|boggs:   318
nathan:        96

wom[ae]n + anita + feminis[tm]: 3518
josh|boggs + kotaku + nathan:   1171


interpretation
==============

(Zoe's actions have actually been disproven to be related to gaming
journalism corruption, hence she could be considered part of the top
group as well; I'm being generous by excluding her and putting her in
her own group.)

Attention on Zoe blows everything else out of proportion.  Despite her
actions largely being problems between her and people she made
relationships with, the channel is primarily concerned with her, with
the pretense of this having anything to do with corruption in gaming
journalism, despite that having been proven wrong.  Leaving aside that
a person's private life is not the business of the public or the
Internet, It's not like the channel is even claiming to be punishing
her for the alleged horrible things she did to her ex-partner; they
simply love being aggressive against her.  Assuming the horrible
things her ex-partner wrote are true, one needs to ask whether the
right course of action is to harass her whole friend circle, or to
suggest her therapy; again leaving aside the fact that a decent person
does not meddle with the private life of a stranger.

Talk about gaming journalism corruption (josh, kotaku, nathan), is
shadowed by talk about (anti-)feminism/misogyny (women, anita,
feminism).  I hope I don't need to present proof that it's mostly
about misogyny and anti-feminism and not positive talk about feminism.
(By the way Anita is Anita Sarkeesian.)

Talk about Kotaku, Joshua Boggs, and Nathan, who could be considered
the gaming journalism corruption figures here, are the smallest focus
in comparison to the other topics.

Nathan is also notorious for being one of those Zoe allegedly cheated
on her partner with, and the original article by Zoe's ex-partner did
not show him in a particularly good light, yet no attention is given
to him in the channel.  Just in case someone claims the channel to be
concerned with infidelity!


conclusion
==========

The "GamerGate" phenomenon is primarily rooted in misogyny, not
concerns over ethics in video game journalism.
